---
layout: post
title: Credit-driven asset bubbles 
subtitle: Housing market in the USA
# cover-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
# thumbnail-img: /assets/img/thumb.png
# share-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
tags: [Central bank, asset bubble, english]
---
When discussing asset bubbles in class, I introduce the question as to whether CB should recognize and prick such bubbles. In both cases, the answer is _no_.

To undesrtand why central banks should not attempt to recognise or prick asset bubbles, we need to look at a recent case. Credit-driven asset bubbles are market conditions in which a specific type of assets experiences increasing prices beyond its _normal_ value. We will look at the american housing bubble that burst in 2006.

Following the dot-com bubble burst of the year 2000 and the recession of 2001, the Federal Reserve maintained a expansionary montetary policy stance that achieved very low effective funds rates (see Fig. 1).
<br>
<iframe src="https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/graph-landing.php?g=CVfR&width=750&height=475" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="overflow:hidden; width:750px; height:525px;" allowTransparency="true" loading="lazy"></iframe>
_Figure 1 -  Effective Federal Funds Rate (DFF)_

At the same time _core inflation_ displayed a decreasing trend (see Fig. 2), which never required a reversal of the monetary policy stance.
<br>
<iframe src="https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/graph-landing.php?g=CVgt&width=750&height=475" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="overflow:hidden; width:750px; height:525px;" allowTransparency="true" loading="lazy"></iframe>
_Figure 2 - Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All Items Less Food and Energy in U.S. City Average (CPILFESL)_

Incentivised by low interest rates, private residential fixed investments increased from mid 2003 at a higher rate (see Fig. 3) then before the 2001 recession.

<iframe src="https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/graph-landing.php?g=CVka&width=750&height=475" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="overflow:hidden; width:750px; height:525px;" allowTransparency="true" loading="lazy"></iframe>
_Figure 3 - Private Residential Fixed Investment (PRFI)_

As demand increased at faster rate than supply, fueled by easy credit conditions, prices of houses started to increase. In some areas they increased very quickly (see Fig. 4). The ever increasing house prices were providing the false guarantee that future market values would have kept intact the quality of the collateral.In such conditions, government entities such as Fannie Mae and Freddi Mac guaranteed mortgages even to subprime borrowers, who would have not qualified for loans in different market conditions. 
<br>
<iframe src="https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/graph-landing.php?g=CVj2&width=750&height=475" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="overflow:hidden; width:750px; height:525px;" allowTransparency="true" loading="lazy"></iframe>
_Figure 4 - All-Transactions House Price Index for Florida (FLSTHPI)_

In same areas, however, prices did not increase that dramatically (see Fig. 5)
<br>
<iframe src="https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/graph-landing.php?g=CVkl&width=750&height=475" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="overflow:hidden; width:750px; height:525px;" allowTransparency="true" loading="lazy"></iframe>
_Figure 5 - All-Transactions House Price Index for Austin-Round Rock-Georgetown, TX (MSA)_

When inflation started to increase, in January 2004, the Federal Reserve started to consider a tightening of their monetary policy and finally increased the Fed Funds Rate Target continuously from mid 2004 to mid 2006 (see Fig. 1). As a consequence, the rate of growth of residential fixed investment decreased at the end of 2005 and became negative in early 2006. Prices of house declined dramatically as the housing bubble was deflating.

The financial industry had heavily invested in mortgage backed derivatives (or MBS, such as the Collaterilised Debt Obligations - CDO). Once the market prices of the collaterals (the houses) collapsed, the value of the mortgages and of the MBS collapsed driving the balance sheet of many banks towards illiquidity positions, when not in straight insolvency. The downturn on the houseing market had just become a financial crises.



Much has been said about the 2008 recession but the [key points][1] are the following:
+ The subprime mortgage crisis started in 2007 when the housing industry’s asset bubble burst.
+ With the previous years’ increasing home values and low mortgage rates, houses were bought not as places to live in, but as investments.
+ Government entities like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac guaranteed mortgages, even if they were subprime or those lent to people who wouldn’t normally qualify for loans
+ Since the financial industry heavily invested in mortgage-backed derivatives, the housing industry’s downturn became the financial industry’s catastrophe.
+ The 2007 financial crisis ushered in the 2008 Great Recession. 

